MA 130-01jCS 502 Applied Discrete Mathematics Spring 2023
(Theoretical Foundations of Computer Science)
Instructor: Dr. Emanuel Andriescu epalsu@monmouth.edu
Oce: HH 228 (732)-571-3524 Oce Hours: MW 10-11:30
Course Information
Class Meetings: T 10:05-11:25, Th 8:30-9:50; HH 306.
Textbook:
Discrete Mathematics for Computer Science , by Liben{Nowell, 2017.
Discrete Mathematics: Mathematical Reasoning and Proof with Puzzles, Patterns, and Games ,
by Ensley and Crawley, 2006.
eCampus: Course materials and announcements will be posted on eCampus.
Course Description: Introduction to reasoning, proof, and exposition in mathematics. Top-
ics include Boolean logic, set theory, counting techniques, functions, mathematical induction,
permutations and the proofs of various elementary theorems.
Learning Goals: At the end of this course, students will be able to:
Develop simple direct, indirect, and inductive proofs.
Give accurate proofs of a few important classical theorems.
Prove statements from set theory.
Demonstrate understanding of elementary topics from number theory via computations,
explanations, proofs, and cryptography.
Solve elementary combinatorial problems.
Demonstrate an understanding of the denition of function and a range of special kinds of
functions, such as permutations and recursively dened functions.
State mathematical denitions correctly.
Demonstrate communication and problem-solving skills that enable you to meaningfully
investigate, discuss, and solve problems using proper language, syntax, and notation, both
orally and in writing.
Translate mathematical statements between English and mathematical symbolism.
Course Expectations
The course has signicant reading and presentation components. Youareexpected tostudy the
assigned material before coming toclass, which will primarily be problem solving oriented. Being
familiar with the main denitions, examples and results from the topic that will be discussed in
the next class is crucial in setting the stage for a productive and engaging class session.
Classwork/Participation: Much of your learning will evolve from in-class activities, experi-
ences and discussions. Regular attendance and a high level of class participation are required. I
expect students to come to each class prepared to participate in the class work. This includes
bringing clean paper and a writing implement.
Most of the class time will be spent working on problems, both individually and in groups, with
students presenting their work attheboard.If you must miss a class, please be aware that it is your responsibility to learn the material
covered, as well as any announcements or other information presented.
Presentations: During the semester students will be required to present problems to the class.
The solutions should be clearly justied and the student should be able to answer related ques-
tions from the classmates or instructor.
Homework: Homework will be assigned each class. These will not be collected, but one week
later you will be asked to reproduce the solution to some of the problems in class without access
to notes or the homework. The lowest 3 homework quiz grades will be dropped.
Exams and Grading: Students will have success in the course if they work hard and maintain
a good attitude. In addition to a cumulative nal exam, there will be two in-class examinations,
as shown in the schedule. Your nal grade will be the maximum of the following two options:
Total score = HwQ(0.25) + Classwork(0.25) + Exam 1(0.15) + Exam 2(0.15) + Final(0.20)
or
Total score = HwQ(0.25) + Classwork(0.25) + Best of Exam 1 and Exam 2(0.15) + Final(0.35)
Monmouth University denes letter grades as follows: A = Exceptional performance, B = Strong
performance, C = Adequate performance, D = Poor performance F = Failing performance
(inadequate for college credit).
A- is earned for a score of at least 90, B- for 80, C- for 70, D- for 60, whereas F is below 60.
The last day to withdraw with a "W" grade is March 20. You will receive a midterm grade on
March 7.
Make-up exams and quizzes and will only be given for legitimate reasons (such as illness or
emergency) with sucient supporting evidence.
Decorum: Please come to class on time and once here, do not leave early. Students will be
expected to display courteous behavior in their interactions with the instructor and fellow class-
mates. Oensive or disruptive behavior is the cause for dismissal from the classroom. Computers
should be used only when I specically approve, and only for class purposes. Anytime during
class, cellphones andanyother electronic devices aretobeturned oandputaway soasnot
todisturb theclass.
Other Information
Getting Help: When you have questions about the material, seek help from the instructor. Do
not wait until it is too late to seek help!
Most of the learning in a college math course is done outside the classroom (via preparation for
next class and presentations, homework assignments, studying for exams), while the best way
to proceed is by practicing. As such, any homework should be taken very seriously. You don't
learn much from a problem you can do immediately. It is essential that you devote adequate
time attempting to solve each assigned problem. You may learn a great deal from honest hard
work on a problem, even if you don't succeed in solving it. Discipline and perseverance will pay
o much more than just quick-wittedness. Read the assigned materials multiple times. It takes
at least three times for an idea worth knowing to sink in.Form study groups with other students in the class.
Math Learning Center isavailable fortutoring help with drop-in andbyappointment options.
Check out hours of operation and details at the MLC webpage.
I will give you continuous advice on how to be successful throughout the semester.
Academic Honesty: Students should familiarize themselves with Monmouth's policies on Aca-
demic Honesty and the Student Code of Conduct. Any violation of the Academic Policies will
result in a grade of 0% for the assignment and may result in a failing grade for the course, sus-
pension, or expulsion from Monmouth University . In particular, it is notacceptable to represent
the work of another (including a peer, a tutor, a textbook, or an Internet source) as your own,
nor is it acceptable to aid another student in falsely representing their work. For example, if
a student allows another student to copy their homework, both students are in violation of the
Academic Honesty policy.
Special Accommodations: Students with disabilities who need accommodations for this
course are encouraged to contact The Department of Disability Services as soon as possible.
In order to receive accommodations, students must be registered with DDS as set forth in
the Student Handbook and must follow the University procedure for self- disclosure, which is
stated in the University Guide to Services and Accommodations for Students with Disabilities.
Students will not be aorded any Accommodations prior to the completion of the registration
process with DDS. Students who are interested in requesting accommodations can begin the
process of registering with DDS by completing the Condential Registration Form located on
DDS website. Students who wish to speak with a disability services administrator should email
dds@monmouth.edu.
Diversity Statement: The School of Science warmly embraces students, sta, and faculty of
all races, genders, ethnicities, sexual orientations, and religions, including physical and cognitive
dierences. Our School recognizes a commitment to diversity as part of our moral obligation
to equity and fairness. We value the diverse experiences of our students, faculty and sta and
celebrate the intellectual gifts diverse perspectives bring to create a learning environment that
allows everyone to succeed and grow.
Should you experience or observe bias and/or discriminatory or harassing behaviors of any sort,
please know that many people are available to help. You can contact your professor, your
academic advisor, the department chair, or any of the Deans. Also the Oce of Equity and
Diversity and Intercultural Center serve the entire MU community.Course Schedule: A tentative weekly schedule of sections to be covered:
Week Topics
1 Numbers and Arithmetic, Basic Set Denitions and Properties
2 Cartesian Product and Power Set, Domain, Range and Composition of Func-
tions, Injective and Surjective Functions
3 Bijective and Inverse Functions, Propositional Logic
4 Propositional Logic, Predicate Logic
5 Direct Proofs
6 Direct Proofs, Proof by Cases
7 Proof by the Contrapositive, Proof by Contradiction
8 Mathematical Induction
9 Strong Induction, Counting Rules
10 More Counting Rules
11 Pigeonhole Principle, Combinations and Permutations
12 Modular Arithmetic, Primality and Relative Primality
13 Multiplicative Inverses, Cryptography
14 Final Exam
I have read the syllabus and understand the general policies, how my grade will be computed,
and I am aware of the resources available for help.
Name: Date:
Once electronically signed and dated, submit a copy to eCampus.